      (PD) 2004 The Bitzi Corporation

1. This work and others bearing the above label were
created by, or on behalf of, the Bitzi Corporation.

2. The Bitzi Corporation places these works into the
public domain, disclaiming all rights granted us by
copyright law.

You are completely free to copy, use, redistribute
and modify this work, though you should be aware of
points (3) and (4), below.

3. The Bitzi Corporation reserves all rights with
regard to any of its trademarks which may appear
herein, such as "Bitzi" or "Bitcollider". Please take
care that your uses of this work do not infringe on
our trademarks or imply our endorsement, for example
be sure to change labels and identifying strings in 
your derivative works.

4. THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE AUTHOR ``AS IS''
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT
NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE
ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL,
EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT
NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS
INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR
TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN
ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF
ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

Please see http://bitzi.com/publicdomain or write
info@bitzi.com for more info.
